# Final Fantasy Tactics: The War of the Lions - PSP

Spoilers for a game that originally came out in 1997.

I really like this game - the fact that I've put up with it to the end is a testament to that.

That said, this game is so frustrating. Some reviews mentioned the weird and sudden jumps in difficulty between missions. Which becomes even more frustrating when that happens between multi-part missions (i.e. with no overworld portion between). The game "helpfully" offers to save between multi-part missions, which is great so long as you remember to save to a backup file and not your main one. There’s a particular fight towards the end of the mid-game (the Wiegraf fight) which is the second part of a multipart mission, and is infamous for being where a lot of people give up. A combination of forgetting to make a second save, and a particularly nasty difficulty jump. This caught me too, and I ended up restarting the save. The game ends in a multi-part boss rush mission, where the level of each boss goes from ~45 to 56 through the course of each part. Which is fine, but, again, another potential for failing just before the end.

The story is great, especially for a game originally released in the 90s. There's depth! Thought it does start to flatten as you advance through the game. Like, early on, the main character (a noble) is basically putting down a peasant revolt. He ends up regretting this, and actually grows. At first, I hoped this would lead to you opposing the nobility & pushing for an early form of democracy. Which (kinda? The game’s framing device tells you this at the beginning) is not what happens, Like the closest is that the new king was part of the peasant class. The next few chapters of the story start to delve into a civil war between the two ruling houses, but then you learn that the thing has been orchestrated by people in the church. Except further on you learn that the big bad are literal demons. Which is so disappointing. The back ~half of the game is basically the main character fighting the demons & their subordinates with a little bit of trying to convince (and largely failing) both ruling houses that they’re being duped. Which is fine, I guess, but it would be a much stronger story it turned out that there weren’t demons at all. Still a really good & complex story. I legitimately want a fanfic that rewrites the big bad to not be demons. Like, magic can exist in the setting & all, I just want these demons to turn out to be myths made up as a kind of in-universe “kid”-friendly way to tell the history of the world.

The gameplay! OMG, so good. Even grinding is fun. Which is good, because, as noted, you’ll need to do that. Especially if you don’t have a routing guide helping you out. The class system is so advanced & complicated, I love that. There’s so many other complexities I didn’t get into in my playthroughs (the zodiac sign system, the pub missions, a large amount of the more complex/hidden classes). One thing I loved was how magic is kind of a crapshoot in this game. All spells have casting times, and even spells which in other games are 100% effective (healing magic) can fail. This can be fixed (kinda) by using the Math/Arithmetics skills, which is a late-game class & allow you to cast most spells with no mana cost, instantly, and at (near) 100% effectiveness. It’s so good.

I’m going to replay this game at some point, but, gosh, the difficulty jumps are so frustrating. There’s also a remake apparently in the works, which would be fun!